
It would be impossible to overestimate the importance of photosynthesis in the maintenance of life on Earth. The Great Oxidation Event, which began about 2.4 billion years ago and was largely driven by the photosynthetic cyanobacteria, raised atmospheric oxygen to nearly 1 percent of present levels over a span of 600 million years, paving the way for the evolution of most forms of multicellular life. Photosynthesis completely transformed Earth’s environment and biosphere. The life-giving process continues to sustain biodiversity since autotrophs are foundational to nearly every food web on the planet. If photosynthesis ceased, there would soon be little food or other organic matter on Earth. Most organisms would disappear, and in time Earth’s atmosphere would become nearly devoid of gaseous oxygen. The only organisms able to exist under such conditions would be the chemosynthetic bacteria, which can utilize the chemical energy of certain inorganic compounds and thus are not dependent on the conversion of light energy.
Energy produced by photosynthesis carried out by plants millions of years ago is responsible for the fossil fuels (i.e., coal, oil, and natural gas) that power industrial society. In past ages, green plants and small organisms that fed on plants increased faster than they were consumed, and their remains were deposited in Earth’s crust by sedimentation and other geological processes. There, protected from oxidation, these organic remains were slowly converted to fossil fuels. These fuels not only provide much of the energy used in factories, homes, and transportation but also serve as the raw material for plastics and other synthetic products. Unfortunately, modern civilization is using up in a few centuries the excess of photosynthetic production accumulated over millions of years. Consequently, the carbon dioxide that has been removed from the air to make carbohydrates in photosynthesis over millions of years is being returned at an incredibly rapid rate. The carbon dioxide concentration in Earth’s atmosphere is rising the fastest it ever has in Earth’s history, and this phenomenon—known as global warming—is expected to have major implications on Earth’s climate.